Add documentation to integrate middlewares (#1653)
doctrine/DoctrineBundle: Resources/doc/middlewares.rst

> Middlewares

Reviewer: Middleware is uncountable

===========

Doctrine DBAL supports middlewares. According to the `DBAL documentation`_:

    "A middleware sits in the middle between the wrapper components and the driver"

> They allows to decorate the following DBAL classes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They allow to decorate the following DBAL classes:
```

    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Middleware;

    class PreventRootConnectionMiddleware implements Middleware
    {
        public function wrap(Driver $driver): Driver
        {
            return new PreventRootConnectionDriver($driver);
        }
    }

As you can see in the ``wrap`` method, the principle of a middleware is
to decorate Doctrine objects with your own objects bearing the logic you
need. Now, the ``connect`` method of the driver must be decorated in
``PreventRootConnectionDriver`` to prevent connections with the root user:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    namespace App\Middleware;

    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Connection;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Middleware\AbstractDriverMiddleware;
    use SensitiveParameter;

    final class PreventRootConnectionDriver extends AbstractDriverMiddleware
    {
        public function connect(array $params): Connection
        {
            if (isset($params['user']) && $params['user'] === 'root') {
                throw new \LogicException('Connecting to the database with the root user is not allowed.');
            }

            return parent::connect($params);
        }
    }

> That's all ! Connection with the root user is not possible anymore. Note

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's all! Connection with the root user is not possible anymore. Note
```

:class:`Symfony\\Bridge\\Doctrine\\Middleware\\Debug\\Middleware` of the
Doctrine Bridge. Decorating the ``Result`` class follows the same principle.

The middleware we've just created applies by default to all the connections.
If your application has several dbal connections, you can limit the middleware
scope to a subset of connections thanks to the ``AsMiddleware`` PHP attribute.
Let's limit our middleware to a connection named ``legacy``:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    namespace App\Middleware;

    use Doctrine\Bundle\DoctrineBundle\Attribute\AsMiddleware;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Middleware;

    #[AsMiddleware(connections: ['legacy'])]
    class PreventRootConnectionMiddleware implements Middleware
    {
        public function wrap(Driver $driver): Driver
        {
            return new PreventRootConnectionDriver($driver);
        }
    }

All the examples presented above assume ``autoconfigure`` is enabled.
If ``autoconfigure`` is disabled, the ``doctrine.middleware`` tag must be
added to the middleware. This tag supports a ``connections`` attribute to
limit the scope of the middleware.

.. note::

>     Middleware have been introduced in version 3.2 of ``doctrine/dbal``

Reviewer 3: I'd revert to Middlewares here, or switch to "Support for middleware".

We seem to be treating middleware as countable in the DBAL docs, and the discussion around @derrabus 's PR: https://github.com/doctrine/dbal/pull/5180

I don't know if that's correct… I think we might be referring to middleware [services/decorators], when using the plural form. Middleware is a concept that exists outside the DBAL, what was added in 3.2 was decorators used as middleware.

Author: @greg0ire I don't know, I've just pushed a [PR to dbal](https://github.com/doctrine/dbal/pull/6033).

Reviewer 2: If we cannot count middleware, the term can't be plural either, so "middleware have"  sounds wrong. I like @greg0ire's suggestion.

```suggestion
    Support for middleware has been introduced in DBAL 3.2
```

Middlewares
===========

> Doctrine DBAL supports middlewares. According to the `Doctrine documentation`_:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Doctrine DBAL supports middlewares. According to the `DBAL documentation`_:
```

    "A middleware sits in the middle between the wrapper components and the driver"

> They allows to decorates the following DBAL classes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They allows to decorate the following DBAL classes:
```

> - Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver
> - Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver\\Connection
> - Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver\\Statement
> - Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver\\Result

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver``
- ``Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver\\Connection``
- ``Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver\\Statement``
- ``Doctrine\\DBAL\\Driver\\Result``
```

Symfony, for instance, uses a middleware to harvest the queries executed by the current page and make them available in the profiler.

> .. _`Doctrine documentation`: https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-dbal/en/current/reference/architecture.html#middlewares

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. _`DBAL documentation`: https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-dbal/en/current/reference/architecture.html#middlewares
```

> You can also create your own middleware. This is an example of a (very) simple middleware that prevent database connection with the root user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also create your own middleware. This is an example of a (very) simple middleware that prevents database connections with the root user.
```

The first step is to create the middleware:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    namespace App\Middleware;

    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Middleware;

    class PreventRootConnectionMiddleware implements Middleware
    {
        public function wrap(Driver $driver): Driver
        {
            return new PreventRootConnectionDriver($driver);
        }
    }

> As you can see in the ``wrap`` method, middlewares principle is to decorate Doctrine objects with your own objects bearing the logic you need. Now, the connect method of the driver must be decorated in ``PreventRootConnectionDriver`` to prevent connection with the root user:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As you can see in the ``wrap`` method, the principle of a middleware is to decorate Doctrine objects with your own objects bearing the logic you need. Now, the ``connect`` method of the driver must be decorated in ``PreventRootConnectionDriver`` to prevent connections with the root user:
```

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    namespace App\Middleware;

    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Connection;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Middleware\AbstractDriverMiddleware;
    use SensitiveParameter;

    final class PreventRootConnectionDriver extends AbstractDriverMiddleware
    {
        public function connect(array $params): Connection
        {
            if (isset($params['user']) && $params['user'] === 'root') {

>                 throw new \LogicException('Connecting database with root user is not allowed.');

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                throw new \LogicException('Connecting to the database with the root user is not allowed.');
```

The middleware we've just created applies by default to all the connections. If your application has several dbal connections, you can limit the middleware scope to a subset of connections thanks to the ``AsMiddleware`` PHP attribute. Let's limit our middleware to a connection named ``legacy``:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    namespace App\Middleware;

    use Doctrine\Bundle\DoctrineBundle\Attribute\AsMiddleware;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver;
    use Doctrine\DBAL\Driver\Middleware;

    #[AsMiddleware(connections: ['legacy'])]
    class PreventRootConnectionMiddleware implements Middleware
    {
        public function wrap(Driver $driver): Driver
        {
            return new PreventRootConnectionDriver($driver);
        }
    }

All the examples presented above assume ``autoconfigure`` is enabled. If ``autoconfigure`` is disabled, the ``doctrine.middleware`` tag must be added to the middleware. This tag supports a ``connections`` attribute to limit the scope of the middleware.

.. note::

>     Middlewares has been introduced in the version 3.2 of ``doctrine/dbal`` and at least the 2.6 version of ``doctrine/doctrine-bundle`` is needed to integrate them in Symfony as shown above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Middlewares have been introduced in version 3.2 of ``doctrine/dbal`` and at least the 2.6 version of ``doctrine/doctrine-bundle`` is needed to integrate them in Symfony as shown above.
```
